descricao: The Digital Technologies, along with cyberspace, become very important allies in the teaching-learning process. In this context, this work aimed to draw a diagnostic profile of the cybercultural level of students enrolled in a subject in an undergraduate course to verify the feasibility of applying the Flipped Classroom methodology. To draw this profile, we provided a questionnaire to students enrolled in the course, resulting in 20 questionnaires answered. In face of the results we can conclude that all research partitipants who answered the questionnaire had a satisfactory level of dromoaptitude that allowed the application of the proposed active methodology.

descricao: Este artigo explora o uso educacional da robótica na simulação de semáforos inteligentes. Ao integrar a robótica ao estudo de semáforos, os alunos compreendem melhor a mobilidade urbana e a segurança viária, desenvolvendo habilidades de resolução de problemas e trabalho em equipe. Além disso, essa abordagem promove a reflexão sobre a importância da mobilidade urbana sustentável e prepara os alunos para enfrentar desafios do mundo real. A robótica educacional aliada aos semáforos inteligentes auxilia estudantes a serem cidadãos conscientes e atuantes na construção de cidades inteligentes e sustentáveis.

descricao: Training students to identify Fake News with digital educational games (DEG) is an initiative that has produced good results. However, considering that each student has his/her own learning characteristics, this work questions whether the use of intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) combined with such DEG can contribute to improving these games in effectively training their players to detect Fake News. In order to obtain evidence to answer the research question raised, this paper reports the development of an ITS combined with JEDi, a DEG created to train students to identify false pieces of News. Experiments report initial results that can be used to improve the proposed combination.

descricao: Este artigo apresenta o desenvolvimento de um jogo sério que tem como foco ser uma ferramenta para auxílio no processo de ensinoaprendizagem da disciplina de uroginecologia, ofertada em cursos superiores de fisioterapia. A solução proposta possui elementos de jogos tradicionais de cartas e mecânicas de jogos mesa em conjunto de elementos de gamificação, buscando ser uma forma mais leve e divertida, porém ainda sim didática, de auxiliar na aprendizagem dos conteúdos vistos em sala de aula.

descricao: Covid-19 outbreak forced schools to adapt to remote learning. However, the lack of accessible web materials made teaching even harder. In this context, this paper aims to relate the development of an educational website produced with Wordpress. The process includes the analyses and selection of resources suitable to WCAG 2.1 and first evaluation contemplated the website source code. The main result is the accessible website developed with Wordpress, theme and plugins. Though, important plugins did not work properly, suggesting the necessity of constant updating and the production of alternatives in order to increase web accessibility.